Hi all, After our conference call of yesterday, I thought it might be a useful idea to detail how we got to where we are on this project. This is of course from my perspective - I'm trying here to ensure we're all considering the same factors.We seem to be struggling to build momentum, and I feel like the original ideas of the project might be failing. So, this is my attempt to explain how I think we got here, and to clarify the original goals, and maybe help find a way forward.About two years ago, we (the UK Web Archive) were struggling to keep Wayback up to date and working. We wanted the more recent features and bug-fixes, but we were hitting problems (e.g. we lost functionality on our production deployment because the configuration behaviour had a breaking change and no test had caught it.). Although we could fix most of them locally, doing so was clumsy and seemed wasteful. We were finding a range of significant changes happening between point releases, such as breaking API changes, code moves between repositories, and required configuration changes. Our builds were further confounded by fact that the archive-commons, wayback and heritrix repositories depended on snapshot versions of each other, and that the build depended on versions of artefacts that were now only available in the Internet Archive Maven repo, and that none of the Wayback/IA artefacts were in Maven Central. I should be clear here - this wasn't the fault of the Internet Archive. They were making all their code available for free, and what they were doing worked perfectly well for them, and indeed if you kept in close sync and if your deployment pattern was close enough to theirs, it all works fine. However, if you were having trouble keeping up, or had a different deployment pattern, life was more difficult. In the last call, Ed said it's kind of surprising that we don't have a playback test harness already. Well, this is why: because IA don't need one. They have their own internal testing procedures, and it works for them, and that mostly works for others.In an attempt to improve the situation, we made some initial effort to see if IA wanted to work with us on these kind of issues. I guess this can be summed up via this pull request, internetarchive/wayback#1 (https://github.com/iipc/openwayback/pull/1). I thought this would be a no-brainer - a simple fix for a basic issue that I thought would be causing fairly widespread playback failure right now. But we got no response. Perhaps I didn’t try hard enough to interact directly with IA, but I didn’t really know them at the time, so I tried to investigate the situation as best as I could. I looked around a bit, saw poorly maintained issue lists (including some old issues, like support for non-compressed WARCs etc.), patchy responses to support issues and rather messy, heavily evolved and evolving codebases, with quite a lot of near-duplicate and possible-dead code.I made some more enquiries via IIPC about the direction of these software projects. A lot of uncertainty seemed to stem from the loss of critical staff members at IA: Brad Tofel (driving Wayback et al) and Gordon Mohr (driving Heritrix). It seemed clear that the IIPC members needed to act in order to try to avoid being overly dependent on individual developers or organisations. We had open source, but we needed open projects.I was also under the impression that we were all maintaining our own forks, patches and fixes independently, and that we would all have much to gain by, say, pooling bug fixes in a shared fork and stabilising releases.I thought to mself, all this needs is just a little structure, a little push, and this will all start to come together. Yes, there would be more overhead because we would be coordinating releases and the roadmap, but the fact that we could share concrete knowledge, fixes and testing would compensate for that additional burden. I also hoped that this would encourage more adoption of the tools and lead to a broader developer community.This lead to the meeting in Paris, and although there were not that many members promising effort, it seemed like the will was there and it should have worked. We totted up our issues, we talked about roadmaps and milestones, and we made up a plan. We asked Mary and now Helen to try and provide that little bit of structure, and to try and ensure we stuck to the roadmap we all said we wanted to deliver.Now, I fear, this roadmap seems to have been more of a wish list. That is,  it was poorly aligned with the work that was actually happening at the IIPC member organisations. Of course, there has been some bad luck too, with BnF being unable to provide the development they originally hoped, but that should not be enough to scupper the whole thing.But we seem to have ended up in a situation where my voice seems to carry far too much weight, and where Helen is reduced to begging/cajoling/nagging/shaming people into taking on the roadmap issues that everyone had previously said they wanted to do. We are not enjoying this. Frankly, I found the last call quite upsetting.I was always aware that getting significant chunks of development effort might be difficult. Many of us are under ‘austere’ conditions, and are unable to hire developers. This was why I looked for ways for IIPC to act to pool funding resources on behalf of multiple institutions to help push things forward. IIPC have paid people to create open source code many times before (WCT, NetArchiveSuite, JWAT, LAP), and I felt my proposals were reasonable extensions of that model. They were met by a mixture of vocal resistance and indifference. Mostly the latter, I fear.However, we do have some small degree of momentum, and so I don't want to fold this whole thing. But I'm not sure what to do next. I'm not convinced that the roadmap is right, that the calls should be run as they are, and that the right people are down as core committers. The calls and the commits should be led by those who are interested in actively contributing to the project, and it's not clear who that is. Maybe we just tried to impose too much structure. Certainly, given the lack of developer time, it would seem prudent to postpone any milestones until after BnF have a developer in place (July-ish, if all goes well, I think).Furthermore, given that there is now the Python version of Wayback too (https://github.com/ikreymer/pywb), it's not clear whether the original idea of pushing IIPC members to invest in stable releases of the Java  implementation of Wayback is still in everyone’s interest. Perhaps the playback test harness would be a better project to gather around, as at least that would give us some way of being reassured that people can safely move between alternative implementations.Given there are nearly 30 people on this mailing list, if would be great to hear from more of you, about what you want from the project, etc. And if your view differs from mine, I hope you'll be willing to express it - this is all about making our efforts more beneficial, and I promise I won't take anything said personally!Thanks for your time.Andy Jackson--Dr Andrew N JacksonWeb Archiving Technical LeadThe British LibraryTel: 01937 546602Mobile: 07765 897948Web: www.webarchive.org.ukTwitter: @UKWebArchive